



Media OPerationS                                                 G. Deen
Internet-Draft                                      Comcast-NBCUniversal
Intended status: Informational                                 S. Mishra
Expires: 13 April 2025                                           Verizon
                                                         10 October 2024


               Network Overlay Impacts to Streaming Video
             draft-deen-mops-network-overlay-impacts-latest

Abstract

   This document examines the operational impacts to streaming video
   applications caused by changes to network policies by network
   overlays.  The network policy changes include IP address assignment,
   transport protocols, routing, DNS resolver which in turn affect a
   variety of important content delivery aspects such as latency, CDN
   cache selection, delivery path choices, traffic classification and
   content access controls.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://gitnnelg.github.io/NetworkOverlays/draft-deen-mops-network-
   overlay-impacts.html.  Status information for this document may be
   found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-deen-mops-network-
   overlay-impacts/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Media OPerationS
   Working Group mailing list (mailto:mops@ietf.org), which is archived
   at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/mops/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/mops/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/gitnnelg/NetworkOverlays.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 13 April 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Internet Privacy Enhancements
     2.1.  Network Overlays
       2.1.1.  Partitioning
       2.1.2.  Policy Changes
       2.1.3.  MASQUE
     2.2.  Making It Easy (for Users) by Working Under the Covers
   3.  Streaming Video
     3.1.  Advances in Streaming Video Architecture
   4.  Emerging Operational Issues with Network Overlay Policy Changes
     4.1.  Policy Changes Hidden from Applications
     4.2.  Routing Changes
       4.2.1.  End to End Problem Discovery
       4.2.2.  CDN Edge Cache Selection due to Routing
     4.3.  Changed Encryption Policy
       4.3.1.  Forced Encryption Upgrade
       4.3.2.  Forced Encryption Downgrade
     4.4.  Changed DNS Resolver Selection
     4.5.  Changed Source IP Address
     4.6.  Performance and Problem determination
     4.7.  Impact of Changing Network Routing and other Policies
       4.7.1.  Middleboxes and learning from the past
   5.  Appendix A: Network Overlays are different than VPNs
     5.1.  VPNs typically:
       5.1.1.  Network Overlays typically:
   6.  Conventions and Definitions
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The past decade of Internet evolution has included two significant
   trends, the global growth of video streaming and active passionate
   work within the IETF on enhancing Internet user privacy.

   The work on these initiatives has largely occured independently of
   one another, though there are a few individuals and companies that
   are involved with both efforts.

   The arrival of the newly developed privacy enhancements in consumer
   products and their subsequent use by streaming video viewers has
   brought the results of the two efforts into contact and a number of
   friction points are now being encountered which are having impacts to
   the viewers, support engineers and operational aspects of video
   streaming platforms.

   To be clear, this document is not proposing or advocating rolling
   back any of the privacy enhancements for the viewers.  Instead the
   authors hope to help describe the problem space and educate the IETF
   and others on the practical operational impacts of these enhancements
   and to eventually develop approaches that can help mitigate such
   impacts.

   The authors also readily acknowledge the many challenges and
   difficulties in improving Internet privacy in an area as complex as
   the Internet while also maintaining compatibiltiy with the wildly
   varied applications and uses of the Internet on which users rely upon
   daily in their lives.  This is hard stuff and it's very natural for
   there to be operational considerations that must be understood and
   folded back into architectural designs and consumer products.

   The motivation in developing this document is to provide a meaningful
   and helpful feedback from the streaming application and streaming
   platform operational perspective to help the enhanced privacy
   architecture work being done at the IETF.

2.  Internet Privacy Enhancements

   Enhancing the Internet's privacy is a difficult challenge, given the
   complexity of the Internet itself.  It's common for solutions that
   address one issue to inadvertently create new problems elsewhere.
   That's not a reason to stop trying, but it is important to understand
   the consequences of changes and to find ways to manage or mitigate
   such impacts, ideally without weakening or rolling back the
   enhancements.

   A popular design choice in privacy enhancements at the IETF has been
   the encapsulation of data inside encrypted connections along with
   other network policy changes to introduce changes which make
   observing and tracing data difficult to do and difficult to associate
   to any particular user.

   [RFC7258] from the IAB examines various pervasive montoring
   approaches while [RFC7624] discusses responses that enhance privacy.
   [RFC9000] itself is an excellent example of the applied design
   approaches and introduces the QUIC transport protocol that is always
   encrypted.

2.1.  Network Overlays

   Along with the use of encrypted connections another popular approach
   is to additionally create alternative routes and tunnels for
   connections which bypass the routing and other policy decisions of
   the ISP access network and of the public open Internet.  These
   alternative network policy choices have the effect of creating a
   Network Overlay that operates on top of and over the device's Access
   Network and the Open Internet, but follows an independent set of
   policies chosen by the Network Overlay.

 R  = router
                  <--- non-overlay traffic path --->
 device -- R ---- R ------------- R ------------- R ---- R -- dest-node
            \                                           /
             \                                         /
              \                                       /
               R -- R -- ingest -- egress -- R ------+
                     <--- overlay traffic path --->

 Figure 1:  Network Overlay routing select traffic via an alternate path

2.1.1.  Partitioning

   Network Overlay policy changes includes an alternate routing policy
   since a fundamental aspect of this design is the tunneling of
   connections through alternate paths to enhance privacy.  The reasons
   for this approach are discussed in the IAB document Partitioning as
   an Architecture for Privacy (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   iab-privacy-partitioning/).

2.1.2.  Policy Changes

   Beyond alternate routing policies, network overlays often also make
   changes to the Source IP Address assignment, and/or selection of the
   DNS Resolver and/or including protocol conversions/translations such
   as HTTP2->HTTP3 and HTTP2->HTTPS2+TLS, and can include IP layer
   changes such as IPv4->IPv6 or IPv6->IPv6 conversions.

2.1.3.  MASQUE

   Protocols such as MASQUE [RFC9484] and services built on it such as
   Apple's iCloud Private Relay (https://www.apple.com/privacy/docs/
   iCloud_Private_Relay_Overview_Dec2021.PDF) are examples of Privacy
   Enhancing Network Overlays that involve making a number of network
   policy changes from the open Internet for the connections passed
   through them.

2.2.  Making It Easy (for Users) by Working Under the Covers

   Historically, incorporating privacy features into consumer-facing
   products has been complex.  This challenge arises from the need to
   address a wide range of use cases while also offering users easy
   access to advanced privacy frameworks and taxonomies.  Many attempts
   have been made and very few have achieved finding success with end
   users.

   Perhaps learning from the lessons of offering too many options, the
   recent trend in privacy enhancements has steered torward either a
   very simple "Privacy On or Off" switch or in other cases
   automatically enabling or "upgrading" to enhance privacy.  Apple's
   iCloud Private Relay can be easily turned on with a single settings
   switch, while privacy features such as Encrypted DNS over HTTP and
   upgrade from HTTP to HTTPS connections have had a number of
   deployments that automatically enable them for users when possible.

   Keeping with the motto of "Keep It Simple", users are generally not
   provided with granular Network Overlay controls permitting the user
   to select what applications, or what network connections the Network
   Overlay's policies can apply to.

   Adhereing with the "Keep It Simple" approach the application itself
   has very little connection to privacy enhancing Network Overlays.
   Applications generally do not have a means to detect when networking
   policy changes are active.  Applications generally do not have a
   means to access policy change settings or to interact to change them.

3.  Streaming Video

   Streaming Video, while just one of the many different Internet
   applications does standout from other uses in a number of significant
   ways that perhaps merit some amount of special consideration in
   understanding and addressing the impacts caused by particular privacy
   enhancing design and service offering choices.

   Firstly, Streaming video operates at a hard to imagine scale -
   streaming video is served globally to more than 2 billion user daily
   currently and continuing to grow in leaps and bounds.

   Secondly, the content types delivered through streaming has evolved
   from the pre-recorded low-resolution, low-bit rate, latency tolerant
   video-on-demand movies, live or pre-recorded TV shows, and user
   generated videos delivered by pioneering streaming platforms to now
   including low-latency 4K and 8K live sports events, while also
   evolving the pre-recorded content with high-bit rate such as 4K and
   8K cinema quality and High Dynamic Range (HDR) lighting.

   Finally, the expectations of streaming video viewers have
   significantly evolved from the days of settling for being able to
   watch a movie in a PC browser.  Viewers expect to watch on any device
   type they want ranging from low-end-streaming sticks that plug into a
   USB port, to 4K and HDR capable laptops, 4K and 8K HDR TV screens,
   gaming consoles, smart phones and many more choices.  Viewers also
   expect to have the same great viewing experience while at home
   connected via high-speed wired Internet, high-speed WiFi, or mobile
   cellular 5G and even satellite Internet connections.

   To meet the growth to billions of users, the growth in content type,
   quality and speed expectations, and on-any-device anywhere that I am
   over any-network-connection expectations of users the Streaming Video
   technology infrastructure has had to itself evolve significantly.
   This video streaming evolution work is being done in the IETF and in
   the Streaming Video Technology Alliance (SVTA)
   (https://www.svta.org/), and in a number of other technical and
   industry groups.

   It's hard to overstate just how much the growth of streaming video
   has contributed to the growth of the Internet.  Internet connections
   of multiples of hundred megabits and gigabits speeds today are
   because of the needs of video streaming, the ongoing work on low-
   latency networking and ultra-low-latency video delivery are both
   driven by the use of streaming video.

3.1.  Advances in Streaming Video Architecture

   Internet streaming has greatly matured and diversified from its early
   days of viewers watching pre-recorded 320x240, 640x480 standard
   definiton 480p movies to wired PCs connected to the Internet via
   high-latency, low-bandwidth DSL as early DOCSIS modems.

   Streaming has grown to the extent that it has become a daily go-to
   video source world wide for billions of viewers and has expanded from
   pre-recorded movies to encompass every type of video content
   imaginable.  This growth to billions of viewers and the addition of
   low latency sensistive content and new connectivity options like
   WiFi, Cellular and Satellite in addition to high-speed DOCSIS and
   fiber is the world streaming platforms now provide service in.

   With the large user base and its usage, the Streaming platforms also
   have significant technical challenges to meet viewer expectations:

   *  (1) Delivery scales that commonly range from hundreds of thousands
      to many millions of viewers simultaneously, with billions of views
      globally daily;

   *  (2) Low latency demands from live sports, live events and live
      streamed content;

   *  (3) content resolutions and corresponding formats which have
      jumped from the days of SD-480p to 4K (3840x2160) and 8K
      (7680x4320) along with bit rates which can had data needs of
      10-24+ Mbps for 4K with 8K demanding 40 Mbps under extreme
      compression and 150-300 Mbps for high quality such as cinema;

   *  (4) devices with very diverse capabilities low-cost streaming
      sticks, to Smart TVs, tablets, phones, and game consoles

   *  (5) broad range of connectivity choices including WiFi, Gig speed-
      low latency DOCSIS, Fiber, satellite, and 5G cellular networks;

   *  (6) application transport protocols including MPEG DASH, HLS,
      HTTP2/TCP, HTTP3/QUIC, WebRTC, Media over QUIC (MoQ) and specialty
      application transports such as SRT, HESP etc.

   To meet these challenges streaming platforms have significantly
   invested in developing delivery architectures that are built with
   detailed understandings of each element in the content delivery
   pathway starting from the content capture all the way through to the
   screen of the viewer.

   Streaming applications are part of an end-to-end architecture that is
   optimized around achieving the best experience including low latency
   video delivery to viewing devices.  The open Internet can be
   unpredictable with temporary issues like packet loss, congestion and
   other conditions.  However, streaming architecture is desiged to
   handle these momentary problems as effectively as possible often
   through use of dynamic adaptive approaches designed into streaming
   protocols and platform components.

4.  Emerging Operational Issues with Network Overlay Policy Changes

   Streaming video applications and the streaming platforms delivering
   content are starting to encounter various operational challenges
   related to Network Overlays.  Typically the primary problems are
   encountered when the network overlay has made policy changes that are
   either unexpected, are difficult or impossible for the streaming
   platform to detect, or the changes are inconsitently applied.

   There are a variety of impacts but a few common classes of issues
   have been observed:

4.1.  Policy Changes Hidden from Applications

   One of the central recurring issues with streaming applications
   running on devices or networks with changed policies due to network
   overlays is that the changes are often hidden from the applications.

   Applications often find it difficult or even impossible to detect
   when network policy changes will be active and what they are
   changing.  For example, a device may have a desingated default DNS
   resolver for the device, but may have a different resolver selected
   depending on how the streaming application queries the DNS.

   Likewise, a streaming application might find that one application
   transport protocol such as HTTP queries will have one set of routing
   policies applied to it but a different appliction transport like
   HTTPS may have a different set of routing policies applied.

   Streaming applications that cannot determine the exact behavior to be
   expected can prevent the streaming application from making good
   content source decisions and can prevent appllications from being
   able to provide reliable feedback and logs when problems are
   encountered.

4.2.  Routing Changes

   Routing changes which cause connections between video applications
   and the infrastructure servcices they use can create a large number
   of problems.

4.2.1.  End to End Problem Discovery

   A common issue in video delivery is locating where along the delivery
   path the video transport is encountering problems.  Often such
   problems are more complex than the connection not working at but
   instead involve identifying bottleneck, lost packets, congestion
   issues.  When the routing changes from what is expected or visible to
   support tools it becomes an operational trouble spot for users and
   platform suport to location and determine the source of the problems.

4.2.2.  CDN Edge Cache Selection due to Routing

   A significant, and often overlooked problm is the addition of network
   latency compared to edge CDN caches or access network peering
   connections.  Routing changes which cause bypassing edge CDN caches
   and instead choosing less optimal caches

 R  = router
           <--- non-overlay traffic path --->
 device -- R ---- R ---- Edge CDN Cache
            \
             \
              \
               R --- R -- ingest -- R --- R -- egress -- R ------R ---- Less Optimal CDN Cache
                     <--- overlay traffic path --->

 Figure:  Routing Changes alering CDN Cache selection

4.3.  Changed Encryption Policy

   Changing the encryption policy applied to video streams either adding
   where it wasn't orginally used or removing if it was originally
   specified can cause a wide range of operational problems.

4.3.1.  Forced Encryption Upgrade

   Changing unencrytped HTTP2 to encrypted HTTP2+TLS connects will
   prohibit streaming workflows that involve content detection as part
   of the network delivery.  This can result in video traffic not being
   correctly identified and the incorrect network policies being applied
   to it.  This is particularly problematic in environments using
   multicast and in mobile environments.

4.3.2.  Forced Encryption Downgrade

   Equally so, removing of encryption applied to the transport stream by
   a streaming platform would be significantly problematic as such
   encryption may be part of a content protection and content integrity
   protections architecture.

4.4.  Changed DNS Resolver Selection

   DNS Resolver choice changes resulting in less optimal CDN cache
   selection or bypassing of CDN load balancing direction

4.5.  Changed Source IP Address

   Changing the Source IP Address for the application's connections to
   Streaming Platform Servers resulting in logging, geofencing, and
   session management problems

4.6.  Performance and Problem determination

   Network overlays often interfere with the tools used in performance
   and problem determination.  This is due to either the tool and
   protocols not able to traverse the alternative route tunnel impacting
   services ability to diagnose connection and performance problems, or
   the network overlay itself not supporting the tool and not supporting
   or carrying the tools functions.

4.7.  Impact of Changing Network Routing and other Policies

   The problem for streaming applications occurs when the underlying
   network properties and policies change from what is expected by the
   streaming application.  In particular when such changes are either
   hidden or not visible to the streaming application.

   While the open Internet is a dynamic environment, changing of basic
   network behavior and policies from what is expected as seen from the
   streaming application, deviate unexpectedly from what the streaming
   application expects.  This behavior disrupts the optimized streaming
   delivery architecture for the end-user device.  Changes to Network
   Policies such the routing, source IP address assigned to the
   streaming application traffic, DNS resolver choice etc influences
   this behavior.

   Having a reliable understanding of the delivery path is essential for
   streaming operators and the introduction of network overlays like
   those based on technologies such as MASQUE especially when designed
   to be undetectable by the applications using them has introduced new
   technical challengess for streaming operators and network operators
   as well as for their viewers.

   The core problem occurs when changes to network policies are made,
   often without notification or visibilty to applications and without
   clear methods of probing to determine and test changed behaviors that
   affect the streaming application's content delivery path resulting in
   increased latency, changes of IP address for the application as seen
   by either the application or the streaming service connection,
   changes to DNS resolvers being queried and the results returned by
   DNS, and changes to application transports such as adding or removing
   outer layer encryption are all problems that have been observed in
   production streaming platforms.

4.7.1.  Middleboxes and learning from the past

   The IETF has discussed this situation in the past, more than 20 years
   ago in 2002 Middleboxes: Taxonomy and Issues [RFC3234] was published
   capturing the issues with Middleboxes in the network and the affects
   of hidden changes occuring on the network between the sender and
   receiver.

5.  Appendix A: Network Overlays are different than VPNs

   While conceptually similar in many ways to VPN (Virtual Private
   Network) technology, the various network overlay technologies
   currently being deployed as well as new ones currently being designed
   by the IETF differ quite siginificanlty from the older VPN approach
   they are replacing in a number of ways.

   It is also worth noting that one reason why the issues discussed in
   this document have not been concerned with regard to VPNs is that
   largely VPNs have not been a pervasive way to stream video.  First,
   many VPNs have not had very good or consistent throughput compared to
   the direct open Internet and so provide a poor viewing experience.
   Second, many video platforms block or deny service to VPN connections
   due to the very common use of VPNs to bypass geofiltering
   restrictions.

   Whatever the reason, it's work looking at how VPNs differ from the
   Network Overlays being discussed herein.

5.1.  VPNs typically:

   *  (1) VPNs typically are detectable by both the video application
      and often by the streaming platform.

   *  (2) VPNs typically work at the network layer of a device,
      resulting in a wide-range (if not all) transports

   *  and protocols from the device flowing through the VPN

   *  (3) VPNs typically provide exception options allowing for
      exclusion from traversing via the VPN based on

   *  various criteria such as application, destination IP address,
      application protocol etc.

5.1.1.  Network Overlays typically:

   *  (1) Network Overlays are often undetectable by video applications
      or by the streaming platform, when in use

   *  (2) Network Overlays often only apply to specific application
      transports such as HTTP2/TCP or HTTP3/QUIC while not applying to
      HTTP2/TCP+TLS on the same device.

   *  (3) Network Overlays often only apply to HTTP connections and do
      not support ICMP, non-http versions of DNS, NTP etc, and various
      tools used for network measurement, problem determination, and
      network management that are not http based.

   *  (4) Network Overlays do not expose to applications any means for
      the application to discover the policy changes the overlay will
      apply to the applications network connections.

   *  (5) Network Overlays do not expose mechanisms or APIs for
      applications to interact with them such as getting or setting
      options.

6.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

7.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3234]  Carpenter, B. and S. Brim, "Middleboxes: Taxonomy and
              Issues", RFC 3234, DOI 10.17487/RFC3234, February 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3234>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7258>.

   [RFC7624]  Barnes, R., Schneier, B., Jennings, C., Hardie, T.,
              Trammell, B., Huitema, C., and D. Borkmann,
              "Confidentiality in the Face of Pervasive Surveillance: A
              Threat Model and Problem Statement", RFC 7624,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7624, August 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7624>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9000]  Iyengar, J., Ed. and M. Thomson, Ed., "QUIC: A UDP-Based
              Multiplexed and Secure Transport", RFC 9000,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9000, May 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000>.

   [RFC9484]  Pauly, T., Ed., Schinazi, D., Chernyakhovsky, A.,
              Kühlewind, M., and M. Westerlund, "Proxying IP in HTTP",
              RFC 9484, DOI 10.17487/RFC9484, October 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9484>.

Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to acknowledge to the contributions from the
   Streaming Video Technology Alliance (SVTA) based on their work
   studying the impacts of network overlays on the streaming platforms.
   In particular, contributions from Brian Paxton have been very
   helpful.

Authors' Addresses

   Glenn Deen
   Comcast-NBCUniversal
   Email: glenn_deen@comcast.com


   Sanjay Mishra
   Verizon
   Email: sanjay.mishra@verizon.com
