



Media OPerationS                                                 G. Deen
Internet-Draft                                      Comcast-NBCUniversal
Intended status: Informational                                 S. Mishra
Expires: 9 January 2025                                          Verizon
                                                             8 July 2024


               Network Overlay Impacts to Streaming Video
             draft-deen-mops-network-overlay-impacts-latest

Abstract

   This document examines the operational impacts to streaming video
   applications caused by changes to network policies by network
   overlays.  The network policy changes include IP address assignment,
   transport protocols, routing, DNS resolver which in turn affect a
   variety of important content delivery aspects such as latency, CDN
   cache selection, delivery path choices, traffic classification and
   content access controls.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://gitnnelg.github.io/NetworkOverlays/draft-deen-mops-network-
   overlay-impacts.html.  Status information for this document may be
   found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-deen-mops-network-
   overlay-impacts/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Media OPerationS
   Working Group mailing list (mailto:mops@ietf.org), which is archived
   at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/mops/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/mops/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/gitnnelg/NetworkOverlays.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 January 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Internet Privacy Enhancements
       1.1.1.  Network Overlays
       1.1.2.  Partitioning
       1.1.3.  Policy Changes
       1.1.4.  MASQUE
       1.1.5.  Making It Easy (for Users) by Working Under the Covers
     1.2.  Streaming Video
     1.3.  Streaming Video Architects and Privacy Enhancement
           Designers Working Together
     1.4.  Emerging Issues with Network Overlay Policy Changes
     1.5.  Streaming at Scale Architecture
     1.6.  Impact of Changing Network Routing and other Policies
     1.7.  Network Overlays and Streaming
     1.8.  Network Overlays are different than VPNs
       1.8.1.  VPNs typically:
       1.8.2.  Network Overlays typically:
     1.9.  Network Overlay Impacts to Streaming Video
   2.  Approaches to Mitigate or Minimize Impacts
     2.1.  Application notification of policy change
     2.2.  Interfaces to access policy settings
     2.3.  Enable Application Level Opt IN or Opt OUT
     2.4.  Appendix A: Detailed Impacts
       2.4.1.  Improper Cache Selection
       2.4.2.  Alternate Routing and Unexpected Routing
       2.4.3.  Bypass of Native Network Policies
       2.4.4.  Incorrect Traffic Classification
       2.4.5.  Increased Latency
       2.4.6.  Impacts of Altered IP Address
       2.4.7.  Performance management
       2.4.8.  Problem Determination
       2.4.9.  Altered logging
       2.4.10. Geofilters breakage
     2.5.  Broken login/authentication
   3.  Conventions and Definitions
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  IANA Considerations
   6.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The past decade of Internet evolution (2014-2024) has include two
   significant trends, firstly the global growth of video streaming and
   secondly, strong work within the IETF, Operating System platforms and
   others to develop new privacy enhancing technologies to protect the
   privacy of Internet users.

   The work of these two groups has largely been done independently of
   one another, though there are a few individuals and companies that
   are involved with both efforts.  However, the arrival of the new
   privacy enhancements in consumer products and their subsequent use by
   streaming video viewers has created a number of friction points which
   are having significant impacts to the streaming video delivery
   ecosystem, creating frustration for users and support issue for
   platforms.

   This document does not propose rolling back privacy enhancement for
   users and the authors readily ackowledge the many challenges and
   difficulties in improving Internet privacy into something as complex
   as the Internet while maintianing compatabiltiy with wildly varied
   applications and uses the Internet's users rely upon daily in their
   lives.

   The hope in developing this document is to provide meaningful and
   helpful feedback from the streaming application and streaming
   platform operational perspective to help the enhanced privacy
   architecture work being done at the IETF.

1.1.  Internet Privacy Enhancements

   Enhancing Internet Privacy is a challenging task to do for something
   as complex as the running Internet and it is easy for great proposals
   that fix one issue to cause new issues to arise in other places.
   That's not a reason to stop trying, but it is important to understand
   the consequences of changes and to find ways to manage or mitigate
   such impacts, ideally without weaking or rolling back the
   enhancements.

   A popular design choice in privacy enhancements at the IETF has been
   the enapsulation of data inside encrypted connections.  {!RFC9000} is
   an excellent example of this design and introduces a protocol that is
   always encrypted.

1.1.1.  Network Overlays

   Along with the use of encrypted connections another popular approach
   is to additionally create alterative routings and tunnels for
   connections which bypass the routing and other policy decisions of
   the ISP access network and of the public open Internet.  These
   alternative network policy choices have the effect of creating a
   Network Overlay that operates ontop of the Access Network and Open
   Internet, but follows its own independent set of policies.

1.1.2.  Partitioning

   Network Overlay policy changes will include an alternate routing
   policy since a fundamental aspect of this design is the tunneling of
   connections through alternate paths to enhance privacy.  The reasons
   for this approach are discussed in the IAB document Partitioning as
   an Architecture for Privacy (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   iab-privacy-partitioning/).

1.1.3.  Policy Changes

   Beyond alternate routing policies, network overlays often also make
   changes to the Source IP Address Assignment, the DNS Resolver
   Selection, can include protocol conversions/translations such as
   HTTP2->HTTP3 and HTTP2->HTTPS2+TLS, and can include IP layer changes
   such as IPv4->IPv6 or IPv6->IPv6 conversions.

1.1.4.  MASQUE

   Protocols such as MASQUE [RFC9494] and services built on it such as
   Apple's iCloud Private Relay (https://www.apple.com/privacy/docs/
   iCloud_Private_Relay_Overview_Dec2021.PDF) are examples of Privacy
   Enhancing Network Overlays that involve making a number of network
   policy changes from the open Internet for the connections passed
   through them.

   The IETF has discussed this situation in the past, more than 20 years
   ago in 2002 Middleboxes: Taxonomy and Issues [RFC3234] was published
   capturing the issues with Middleboxes in the network and the affects
   of hidden changes occuring on the network between the sender and
   receiver.

1.1.5.  Making It Easy (for Users) by Working Under the Covers

   Privacy has historically been a complicated feature to add into
   products targeted to end users.  There are many reasons for this such
   as trying to meet every possible scenario and use-case and trying to
   provide easy user access to advanced privacy frameworks and
   taxonomies.  Many attempts have been made, very very few have
   succeeed in finding success with end users.

   Perhaps learning from the lesson of offering too many options the
   recent trend in privacy enhancements has steered torward either a
   very simple "Privacy On or Off" switch or in other cases
   automatically enabling or "upgrading" to enhance privacy.  Apple's
   iCloud Private Relay can be easily turned on with a single settings
   switch, while privacy features like Encrypted DNS over HTTP and
   upgrade from HTTP to HTTPS connections have had a number of
   deployments automatically enable them for users when possible.

   Keep with the Keep It Simple approach, users are generally not
   provided with granular Network Overlay controls permitting the user
   to select what applications, or what networok connections the Network
   Overlay's policies apply to.

   Also, keeping with the Keep It Simple approach the application itself
   has very little connection to privacy enhancing Network Overlays.
   Applications generally do not have a means to detect when networking
   policy changes are active.  Applications generally do not have a
   means to access policy change settings or to interact with changing
   them.

1.2.  Streaming Video

   Streaming Video, while just one of the many different Internet
   applications does standout from other uses in a number of significant
   that perhaps merit some amount of special consideration in
   understanding and addressing the impacts caused by particular privacy
   enhancing design and service offering choices.

   Firstly, Streaming Video operates at a hard to imagine scale -
   streaming video globally to be more than 2 billion user daily
   currently and continuing to grow in leaps and bounds.

   Secondly, the content types delivered through streaming has evolved
   from the pre-recorded low-resolution, low-bit rate, latency tolerant
   Video On Demand movies, TV shows, and user generated videos delivered
   by pioneer streaming platforms to now include low-latency 4K and 8K
   live sports events, while also evolving the pre-recorded content to
   become very resolution and high high-bit rate 4K and 8K cinema
   quality and High Dynamic Range (HDR) lighting.

   Finally, the expectations of streaming video viewers has signiciantly
   evolved from the days of settling for being able to watch a movie in
   a PC browser.  Viewers expect to watch on any device type the want
   from low-end-streaming sticks that plug into USB ports, to 4K and HDR
   capable laptops, 4K and 8K HDR TV screens, gaming consoles, phones
   and many many more choices.  Viewers also expect to have the same
   great viewing experience while at home connected via high-speed wired
   Internet, high-speed WiFi, or mobile celluar 5G and even satelite
   Internet connections.

   To meet the growth to billions of users, the growth in content type,
   quality and speed expectations, and the on-any-device anywhere that I
   am over any-network-connection expectations of users the Streaming
   Video technonology infrastructure has had to itself evolve
   signifcantly.  This is video streaming evolution work that done in
   the IETF, in the Streaming Video Technology Alliance (SVTA)
   (https://www.svta.org/), and in a number of other technical and
   industry groups.

   It's hard to over state just how much the growth of Streaming Video
   has contributed to the growth of the Internet.  Internet connections
   of hundred megabit and gigabit speeds are because of the needs of
   video streaming, the ongoing work on low-latency networking and
   ultra-low-latency video delivery are both driven by streaming video.

1.3.  Streaming Video Architects and Privacy Enhancement Designers
      Working Together

   Given the importantance of streaming video to the Internet's users,
   network operators, streaming platform services, and many others it
   only makes sense that as the IETF and it's participants work on
   improving privacy for those same users that the two efforts work
   together for everyone's benefit.

1.4.  Emerging Issues with Network Overlay Policy Changes

   Streaming video applications and the streaming platforms they get
   their content from run into problems when these privacy enhancing
   technologies change the behaviors to network connections and to the
   underlying Internet for the streaming video connections from devices
   to content sources.  Particular problems arise when such changes are
   done in a way that hides the changes, or even that they are going to
   occur from the streaming application.

   This document is not intenteded to challenge the need for privacy
   enchancements for the Internet, instead the hope is to illustrate
   impacts of such changes to the billions of users of Streaming Video
   delivered over the Internet so that the designers of privacy
   enhancements and the designers of services built on them can better
   understand the impacts of different design choices and perhaps find
   ways to mitigate such impacts through altered design choices.

   Streaming applications, which themselves are part of a well designed
   and optimized streaming delivery architectured, operating over an
   privacy enhanced network connection run into problems when the actual
   connections behaviour deviates in unexpected and often unpredictable
   ways from the expected connection behavior.

1.5.  Streaming at Scale Architecture

   Internet streaming has greatly matured and diversified from its early
   days of viewers watching pre-recorded 320x240, 640x480 standard
   definiton 480p movies to wired PCs connected to the Internet via
   high-latency, low-bandwidth DSL as early DOCSIS modems.

   Streaming has grown be a daily go-to video source world wide for
   billions of viewers and has expanded from pre-recorded movies to
   encompass every type of video content imaginable.  This growth to
   billions of viewers and the addition of low latency sensistive
   content and new connectivity options like WiFi, Cellular and
   Satellite in addition to high-speed DOCSIS and fibre is the world
   streaming platforms now provide service in.

   Streaming platform have now have significant technical challenges to
   meet viewer expectations:

   *  (1) Delivery scales that commonly range from hundreds of thousand
      to millions of viewers simultaneously, with billions of views
      world wide daily;

   *  (2) Low latency demands from live sports, live events and live
      streamed content;

   *  (3) content resolutions and corresponding formats which have
      jumped from the days of SD-480p to 4K (3840x2160) and 8K
      (7680x4320) along with bit rates which can had data needs of
      10-24+ Mbps for 4K with 8K demanding 40 Mbps under extreme
      compression and 150-300 Mbps for high quality such as cinema;

   *  (4) devices with very divese capabilities low-cost streaming
      sticks, to Smart TVs, tablets, phones, and game consoles

   *  (5) broad range of connectivity choices including WiFi, gig speed-
      low latency DOCSIS, satellite, and 5G cellular networks;

   *  (6) application transport protocols including DASH, HLS, http2/
      tcp, http3/QUIC, WebRTC, Media over QUIC (MoQ) and speciality
      application transports such as SRT, HESP etc.

   To meet these techincal challenges streaming platforms have
   significantly invested in developing delivery architectures that are
   built with detailed understandings of each element in the content
   delivery pathway from the content capture all the way through to the
   screen of the viewer.

   Streaming applications are part of an end to end architecture that is
   optimized around achieving the best experience including low latency
   video delivery to viewing devices.  Obviously the open Internet can
   be unpredictable with momentary issues such as packet loss,
   congestion and other conditions but streaming architecture is desiged
   to do its best when such momentary problems arise.

1.6.  Impact of Changing Network Routing and other Policies

   The problem for streaming applications occurs when the underlying
   network properties and policies change from what is expected by the
   streaming application.  In particular when such changes are not
   visible to the streaming application, which unfortuately has emerged
   as a common behavior of privacy enhancing technologies based on
   standards such as MASQUE [RFC9484]

   While the open Internet is a dynamic environment, changing of basic
   network behaviour and policies, from what is expected as seen from
   the streaming application, deviate unexpectedly from what the
   streaming application expects disrupts the optimized streaming
   delivery architecture the devcei.  Changes to Network Policies such
   the routing, source IP address assigned to the streaming application
   traffic, DNS resolver choice etc.

   Having an understanding and a predicatablity of the delivery path is
   essential for streaming operators and the introduction of network
   overlays based on technologies such as MASQUE especially when they
   are designed to not be easily detected, even by applications using
   them has created a new set of technical problems for streaming
   operators and network operators and for the viewers that subscribe to
   them.

   The core problem occurs when changes to network policies are made,
   often without notification or visibiltiy to applications and without
   clear methods of probing to determine and test changed behaviors that
   affect the streaming application's content delivery path resulting in
   increased latency, changes of IP address for the application as seen
   by either the application or the streaming service connection,
   changes to DNS resolvers being queried and the results returned by
   DNS, and changes to application transports such as adding or removing
   outter layer encryption are all problems that have been observed in
   production streaming platforms.

   This document dicusses the various operational impacts and attempts
   to provide a few preliminary approachs that could help mitigate the
   impacts.

1.7.  Network Overlays and Streaming

   The Network Overlays being discussed in this document is a generic
   term to characterize any technology that changes the network and
   associated services that a streaming application uses to connect to
   streaming service infrastructure such as CDN caches, authentication,
   content protection, telemetry and UI services.

   The Network Overlays impacting stream have a common characteristic is
   the creation of a new network tunnel carrying traffic from the user
   device through an alternative routing to the native underlying
   network, which itself can be characterized as a change in the network
   policy for the affected traffic.

   Example 1.  Network Overlay routing select traffic via an alternate
   path   R = router   <--- non-overlay traffic path ---> device ------
   R -------- R ------------------------------ R ---------------- R ----
   R ---- dest-node    \ /    \ /    \ /    R ----- R ----- ingest-node
   ----- egrees-node ----- R --+    <--- overlay traffic path --->

1.8.  Network Overlays are different than VPNs

   While conceptually similar in many ways to VPN (Virtual Private
   Network) technology, the various network overlay technologies
   currently being deployed as well as new ones currently being designed
   by the IETF differ quite siginificanlty from the older VPN approach
   they are replacing in a number of ways.

1.8.1.  VPNs typically:

   *  (1) VPNs typically are detectable by both the video application
      and often by the streaming platform.

   *  (2) VPNs typically work at the network layer of a device,
      resulting in a wide-range (if not all) transports

   *  and protocols from the devive flowing through the VPN

   *  (3) VPNs typically provide exception options allowing for
      exclusion from traversing via the VPN based on

   *  various criteria such as application, destination IP address,
      application protocol etc.

1.8.2.  Network Overlays typically:

   *  (1) Network Overlays are often undetectable by video applications
      or by the streaming plaform, when in use

   *  (2) Network Overlays often only apply to specific application
      transports such as HTTP2/TCP or HTTP3/QUIC while not applying to
      HTTP2/TCP+TLS on the same device.

   *  (3) Network Overlays often only apply to HTTP connections and do
      not support ICMP, non-http versions of DNS, NTP etc, and various
      tools used for network measurement, problem determination, and
      network manangement that are not http based.

   *  (4) Network Overlays do not expose to applications any means for
      the application to discover the policy changes the overlay will
      apply to the applications network connections.

   *  (5) Network Overlays do not expose mechanisms or APIs for
      applications to interact with them such as getting or setting
      options.

1.9.  Network Overlay Impacts to Streaming Video

   As discussed Streaming Video delivery is done at scale using highly
   optimized delivery paths and infrastructure choices.  The priamry
   impact comes from the unpredicatable changes overlays make that alter
   this optimized delivery path.

   A significant problem to address is the general problem of the
   Streaming Application not being able to determine the changes that
   will be made to its network connections.  Routing changes impact
   latency and can impact bandwidth; Changing the DNS resolver can
   change CDN Cache selection; Changing the source IP address of the
   Streaming Application, without the Streaming Application being aware
   of the change impacts CDN Cache selection, logging, authentication;
   Changing connections from HTTP2 to HTTP3 or HTTP3 to HTTP2
   fundamentally impacts latency and CDN caching; Changing HTTP2
   connections to HTTP2+TLS or HTTP3 impacts both latency and CDN
   caching.

2.  Approaches to Mitigate or Minimize Impacts

   There are a number of ways Network Overlays can work with Streaming
   Applications to mitigate or at best minimize their impacts.

   A common theme in many of the mitigation proposal is making the
   Network Overlay changes and behavior transparent to the Streaming
   Application.  This approach should not affect privacy enhancements of
   the Network Overlay as it doesn't alter the Network Overlay.
   Enabling the Streaming Application to better understand the network
   environment it is operating, allows the application to adapt the
   changes and work within them.

   The other approach is enabling applications to be excluded from
   network overlays.  This could be be done through a variety of
   approaches such as providing users an option on their device to
   exclude either by specific applications, by specific end point
   destinations identified by DNS name or IP address, or by some other
   characteristic.  Another opt

2.1.  Application notification of policy change

2.2.  Interfaces to access policy settings

2.3.  Enable Application Level Opt IN or Opt OUT

2.4.  Appendix A: Detailed Impacts

2.4.1.  Improper Cache Selection

2.4.2.  Alternate Routing and Unexpected Routing

2.4.3.  Bypass of Native Network Policies

2.4.4.  Incorrect Traffic Classification

2.4.5.  Increased Latency

2.4.6.  Impacts of Altered IP Address

2.4.7.  Performance management

2.4.8.  Problem Determination

2.4.9.  Altered logging

2.4.10.  Geofilters breakage

2.4.10.1.  unintended blocking

2.5.  Broken login/authentication

3.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

4.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3234]  Carpenter, B. and S. Brim, "Middleboxes: Taxonomy and
              Issues", RFC 3234, DOI 10.17487/RFC3234, February 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3234>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9484]  Pauly, T., Ed., Schinazi, D., Chernyakhovsky, A.,
              Kühlewind, M., and M. Westerlund, "Proxying IP in HTTP",
              RFC 9484, DOI 10.17487/RFC9484, October 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9484>.

   [RFC9494]  Uttaro, J., Chen, E., Decraene, B., and J. Scudder, "Long-
              Lived Graceful Restart for BGP", RFC 9494,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9494, November 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9494>.

Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to acknowledge to the contributions from the
   Streaming Video Technology Alliance (SVTA) based on their work
   studing the impacts of network overlays on the streaming platforms
   participating in the SVTS.  In particular the contributions of Brian
   Paxton have been very helpful.

Authors' Addresses

   Glenn Deen
   Comcast-NBCUniversal
   Email: glenn_deen@comcast.com


   Sanjay Mishra
   Verizon
   Email: sanjay.mishra@verizon.com
